---
layout: post
shortnews: false
title: The Superhero Network - A Case for Experts in CS Harassment
---

I spent the bulk of last week doing two types of service that I don't
necessarily enjoy but feel is important: reviewing SOSP papers and
fighting harassment.  I realized that there are many parallels between
my work on both. When I review papers for SOSP, I'm lending my
expertise to the community by critiquing and hopefully improving
research publications in systems.  I try to be a productive reviewer
and offer suggestions to improve the paper, rather than just
critiquing it.  This is the big benefit of submitting to SOSP: you get
a panel of experts to look at your research and let you know what is
working and what isn't, which hopefully you can then implement to
improve your research.  I end up offering the same advice so much
that I recently wrote [a blog post on it.](_posts/2021-6-5-hints.md)

I realized that, as an increasingly senior woman in the CS community,
I'm constantly being called on to help with D&I and fighting various
forms of harassment.  However, I have no expertise in this matter.
Thus, I set about educating myself, much like I would for any research
topic that I want to start working on, and I saw a lot of parallels.
For example, most recently, I've become an expert on kernel-bypass and
its challenges for datacenter programmers.  For both kernel-bypass and
harassment in the CS academic community, people fall into levels of
HotCRP reviewer expertise:

1. No Familiarly: Not aware that the problem exists. Most people fall
   into this category, including myself, barring the few times that I
   experienced harassment myself.
   
2. Some familiarity: Aware of the problem but do not necessarily think
   it's solvable or worth solving. Alternatively, may be aware of the
   problem and why it's important but do not having any ideas on how to
   solve it.

3. Knowledgeable: Has some expertise on the problem and is able to
   propose solutions.

4. Expert: Has a deep understanding of the problem from working on
   it. Has implemented some previous solutions and  understands what
   works and doesn't.
   
Unfortunately, unlike kernel-bypass, gaining expertise in this area is
challenging.  It's been hard for me to find previous work on fighting
harassment in academic communities and don't have any other experts to
mentor me right now.  Maybe real experts do not exist because no one
has made it their work to fight, and especially prevent, harassment in
the CS community.  As a community, we are reactionary: we get together
and talk about it when specific incidents happen but have not
implemented prevention.

Let me very clear: Harassment of all forms (sexual, sexism, racism,
bullying) exists in the CS community.  It is pervasive and
"cancelling" a few problematic members of the community will not fix
it.  We must focus on prevention, instead of intervention, because
once someone has had a bad experience, it is already too late.  While
the ACM CARES committees and conference diversity chairs are a step in
the right direction, none of the people in these roles are necessarily
qualified to be experts on them.  I was asked to be on the SIGOPS CARES
committee and I certainly am not.

Thus, the [Superhero
network](https://github.com/iyzhang/superhero-network) aims to fix
that.  I want to gather and train a group of people to be experts in
coping with and fighting harassment.  We will do research, read the
literature, share experiences and mentor each other.  We will put
together references and recommendations for conferences and help
others that are looking to help. And hopefully, together we will move
the needle on this problem that desperately needs attention.


